‎Over 100 years ago,
‎on October 31, 1916,
‎Brother Charles Taze Russell
‎was traveling on a train
‎as part of a lecture tour
‎across the United States.
‎Quite unexpectedly,
‎and at the young age of 64,
‎Brother Russell died.
‎For years, he had been traveling continually.
‎You know, it’s been said
that Brother Russell covered
‎more than a million miles.
‎Now, of course, some of you
may have accomplished that feat,
‎but at that time, of course,
we were not talking about air travel.
‎Brother Russell
had to accomplish that by train and ship
‎and goodness knows what other means
—quite an accomplishment!
‎In addition to that, he had delivered
‎more than 30,000 sermons, lectures, and talks.
‎He had written books and other material
‎totaling over 50,000 pages.
‎Yet, despite all of the privileges
that he had enjoyed
‎​—his tremendous Bible knowledge
‎and the powerful way
that Jehovah had used him​—
‎in just a moment he was gone.
‎It really illustrates
the truth of what James says here
‎at James 4:​13, 14.
‎Let’s read this together,
‎James 4:​13.
‎It says: “Come, now, you who say:
‎“‘Today or tomorrow we will travel
‎“‘to this city and will spend a year there,
‎“and we will do business and make some profit,’
‎“whereas you do not know
what your life will be like tomorrow.
‎“For you are a mist
that appears for a little while
‎and then disappears.”
‎Well, that’s true.
‎You see, really, no matter
what privileges we may enjoy​
‎—how skilled a teacher we may be,
what knowledge we’ve accumulated​—
‎we are all just like
‎‘a mist appearing for a while
and then disappearing.’
‎Well, this is an idea
‎that occurs over and over again
in the Scriptures
‎and, really, with the purpose
‎of encouraging all of us
‎to take
a close and sober and serious look
‎at the way that we use our lives.
‎And even more importantly,
‎how we use them to serve Jehovah.
‎In Luke chapter 12,
‎you’ll remember that Jesus taught
an illustration regarding a rich man.
‎Do you remember this?
‎Let’s open our Bibles and read it together,
‎Luke 12:16.
‎Now, just before we read it,
you’ll remember that the purpose
‎of Jesus giving this illustration
was to emphasize the importance
‎of being rich toward God.
‎Now, let’s read
what he says here in verse 16:
‎“The land of a rich man produced well.
‎“So he began reasoning within himself,
‎“‘What should I do now that I have
nowhere to gather my crops?’
‎“Then he said, ‘I will do this:
‎“‘I will tear down
my storehouses and build bigger ones,
‎“‘and there I will gather
all my grain and all my goods,
‎“‘and I will say to myself:
‎“‘“You have many
good things stored up for many years;
‎take it easy, eat, drink, enjoy yourself.”’
‎“But God said to him, ‘Unreasonable one,
‎“‘this night they are demanding
your life from you.
‎“Who, then, is to have
the things you stored up?’
‎“So it goes with the man
who stores up treasure for himself
‎but is not rich toward God.”
‎Well, what was the problem with this man?
‎In the 2007 Watchtower,
August 1st issue,
‎this illustration was discussed.
‎And The Watchtower said
that “the rich man’s plan
‎“provided [really] only
a false sense of security.
‎“Practical as it might have seemed [to him],
‎“it left out one vital element​—God’s will.
‎“The man was only thinking about himself,
‎“how he would be able to take his ease
‎“and eat, drink, and enjoy himself.
‎“He thought that because [he had]
‘many good things,’
‎he would also have ‘many years.’”
‎Isn’t that an interesting point?
‎You see, he thought the abundance
of things that he possessed
‎would somehow equate
to the length of his life.
‎But The Watchtower went on to say:
‎“Too bad for him,
things did not work out that way.
‎“Just as Jesus said earlier,
‘even when a person has an abundance
‎his life does not result
from the things he possesses.’”
‎Well, that brings us back to James chapter 4.
‎Let’s go back there again,
‎and look at what verse 15 says.
‎See, after commenting on how
a life is just like a mist appearing,
‎then verse 15 says:
‎“Instead, you should say:
‘If Jehovah wills,
‎we will live and do this or that.’”
‎You see, the Bible makes it clear
that we should never ever develop
‎overconfidence
—overconfidence in anything​—
‎in our position, our knowledge,
our wisdom, our wealth.
‎But instead, you see,
have complete confidence in Jehovah.
‎Really, our only hope,
‎our only confidence is with Jehovah.
‎Now, this applies
not just to our view of life itself
‎but, really,
also to our view of all of our activities.
‎You see, in that verse in James chapter 4,
‎it says that it’s not just about our life
‎but about whether we will do this or do that.
‎So it really applies to all
‎of the different things that we do every day.
‎Recently, we’ve been hearing reports
‎of increasing persecution
in various lands, including Russia.
‎Now, when we hear those reports,
‎perhaps we begin to think right away
‎that this is something
that could only happen in a faraway land.
‎You see, in countries like
the United States and Canada
‎(those who are listening to this program),
‎perhaps we have the attitude that, well,
‎this freedom of worship that we enjoy
‎is always going to be here,
and it will never change.
‎But it’s interesting
to consider what happened in one case
‎in 1972 in the country of Singapore.
‎On January 12, 1972,
‎a missionary
who was serving at the branch,
‎received a letter suddenly
​—hand delivered to him​—
‎saying that he was banished
from the country
‎and must leave within two weeks.
‎Now, this brother
had been serving there peacefully
‎for 23 years;
‎everything was going along very smoothly.
‎Two days later,
the Kingdom Hall was padlocked,
‎all the literature was banned in the country,
‎the bank accounts
that belonged to the branch
‎and to the congregation were all seized.
‎Well, suddenly
and very unexpectedly our work
‎and all of our activities
had been banned in that country.
‎Well, now, what do we learn from this?
‎Is it to teach us that we should live
in some kind of morbid fear
‎that our work is going to be banned
at any moment?
‎Well, what’s the real reality
of what happened in Singapore?
‎How did those unexpected events
‎affect our brothers in that land?
‎Well, they were not broken.
‎Looking to Jehovah
with complete confidence,
‎they continued to find ways
to worship Jehovah.
‎And Jehovah has blessed their efforts
‎right up until this present day.
‎So, brothers, it’s true,
‎as James chapter 4 teaches us,
‎life in this system
is really filled with uncertainty.
‎But if we have made Jehovah our confidence
‎and if we are truly rich toward God,
‎then, really, whatever may come,
‎whatever situation may befall us
‎​—even our untimely death​—
‎we are completely
and totally safe with Jehovah.
‎And he is the One
​—because we’ve made him our confidence​—
‎who will care for us in every way.